Title: Is Everything on Facebook Public?
Date: 2010-09-15 14:15
Category: Social Media
Slug: is-everything-on-facebook-public
Tags: social media, facebook, privacy
Author: Ross Fenning

Facebook has been home to no shortage of awkward or destructive moments
for some users with [one woman getting fired for speaking ill of her
boss,](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/facebook/6027302/Woman-sacked-after-abusing-boss-on-Facebook.html)
[another woman losing insurance benefits after the company dug up photos
of her on
holiday](http://www.cbc.ca/canada/montreal/story/2009/11/19/quebec-facebook-sick-leave-benefits.html)
and [thirteen employees of Virgin Atlantic being sacked for comments
made on the website.](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7703129.stm) It is
clear that many users willingly put up private information without due
consideration of the consequences of certain eyes viewing it.

Did these users bring it on themselves? Is Facebook responsible for its
handling of privacy in these cases and similar ones? Facebook has
certainly been under attack a lot for "privacy concerns", so what can be
done about it if these attacks are justified?

Even for non-incriminating data, fears and controversy have been
bubbling over Facebook's alleged lack of respect for privacy either by
[changing the default privacy settings for personal information to be
more permissive over time](http://mattmckeon.com/facebook-privacy/) or
by [holding personal information
indefinitely](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/11/technology/11facebook.html?_r=2&ref=business&oref=slogin)
(however [it is now possible to delete
permanently](http://www.facebook.com/help/?faq=12271&ref_query=how+do+I+delete)
should users so wish). The issue is particularly controversial again in
light of [a 2004 instant message conversation involving Facebook founder
Mark
Zuckerberg](http://www.boingboing.net/2010/09/14/damning-zuckerberg-i.html?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+boingboing%2FiBag+%28Boing+Boing)
showing a lack of concern for people's private information, albeit at a
time when Facebook was a small website just for Harvard and not the
global business it is today.

Whilst the behaviour of Facebook and its founder [can be criticised in
several ways](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_Facebook), how
much do users have themselves to blame for a lack of protection of their
own information? In fact, while discussing Mark Zuckerberg's comments
from 2004, one Facebook user made the following assertion:

> Everything you post on Facebook is public. If you don't want it
> public, don't post it.

One could be forgiven for being incredulous that people would willingly
post information on a public website that is private in any way. That we
see so many examples of information being shown to an unintended
audience suggests that the privacy controls Facebook provides to allow
users to restrict who sees what information are either ineffective or
aren't being used.

If the latter case were true, the public exposure of things intended to
be restricted to a private audience is indeed attributable to the
carelessness of the users in question. However, what if there is more
truth in the former and blame can be placed on the privacy settings
themselves? Perhaps they are not a good way to control the spread of
your information?

The nature of the Internet and the World Wide Web is that data are
copied at near instant rates with little to no effort nor expense. The
result is that a compromising photograph or slip of the proverbial
tongue need only be seen and copied by one person for one no longer to
have full control thereof. Celebrities and organisations that try to get
bloggers to take down private or copyrighted images and information
fight an uphill battle against the [Streisand
Effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Streisand_effect) — a phenomenon
where attempts at censorship usually result in the target information
being spread even more widely than it otherwise would have been.

With this in mind, it could be said that the only way not to have
private information on Facebook leak out is not to put it there at all.
This approach treats Facebook as an entirely public website. Whilst the
privacy controls can keep a lot of things restricted to friends only,
one should still only puts up things that wouldn't be catastrophic if
they leaked beyond that circle.

This does sound like a safe absolute, but does it preclude some of the
benefits and user needs of social networking? Is it possible to maintain
the utility of a social website whilst simultaneously having true
control of private information?

At a very basic level, social websites such as Facebook operate as a
self-updating address book. Friends, contemporaries and colleagues can
all change telephone numbers, addresses and email addresses over the
years. Thus having one point of access to find the current email address
or mobile phone number of someone is certainly convenient. Even the
inversion of that process — whereby a user can change their mobile
number in one place and know all their contacts have the updated version
automatically — has benefits.

However, we do not necessarily want our contact details harvested by
anyone outside of our circle of trustworthy people and moreover
certainly not by spammers. In light of this, there is a need for this
information to have access controls with which to restrict to friends or
even a subset thereof.

This is still subject to the same problem that one of your friends need
only pass the details on for the information to have leaked outside your
trust circle, but this is no worse than what we had before in that one
cannot stop one's mobile number being given away by someone who already
knows it.

This is not to mention all the private conversation users may wish to
have amongst friends whether it be one-to-one correspondence or
discussions within a select groups. Clearly, the ability to restrict
access to such things is useful.

So, assuming we not only have a need for some level of privacy in our
interactions on social networks, but we competently use the appropriate
settings to control it, is there still any need for concern? Facebook's
targeted advertising effectively monetises your user information and
with the past record of criticisms over its treatment of privacy, can we
trust the company at all with even modest amounts of personal data? Are
the privacy settings effective enough?

We can look back well before the formation of Facebook to find people
were communicating over computer networks for quite some time. One of
the longest-running systems is that of email itself. Many people have
few reservations about engaging in very private conversations via email
with a justified expectation that their discourse will not automatically
appear to the public eye.

Yet many people use free services such as Gmail, Hotmail and Yahoo to
send, read and store all their emails. They have willingly allowed a
third party storing every conversation they've had, perhaps even after
deleting the email (it's not unlikely that many services would keep
backups for 30 days or some other period of time). So, what's different
here? Why is there not a privacy scare once a week over leaked emails?

The key difference here is that email is not one website or service.
[SMTP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Mail_Transfer_Protocol) which
still defines how email is sent over the Internet was first defined in
1982 and is a fully open standard that any person or service may freely
implement. This allows Hotmail users to send emails to Gmail users and
Gmail users to send emails to a company's own email system with few
problems. This contrasts the "walled garden" approach of Facebook from
which you cannot possibly send messages to Myspace or Bebo. Furthermore,
there is in fact no real way for users of any of the major social
networks to interact outside of their own website.

So, why should Facebook knock down those walls and let people interact
with Myspace users? Isn't that their own decision? In a competitive
marketplace, why should companies be forced to encourage users to move
to rival websites? It is a common free market mantra that freedom comes
from not regulating companies too much, but paradoxically consumer
choice can be increased with the right regulation in the right places.

The US government has brought many legal actions against Facebook and
the very fact they are so concerned with the privacy problems
demonstrates there is a perception of an issue for society's well-being
in general if they are allowed to proceed unchecked. Breaking down the
walls and forcing interoperation between services — just as we already
have with email — could be a simple and elegant way to do address these
issues with economic pressures, rather than fire-fighting with
litigation.

Unintentional and arguably deliberate abuses of privacy from a website
that knows its userbase will barely wane as a result is behaviour
idiosyncratic of a monopoly — a company that doesn't have to woo
customers has much more of a carte blanche to behave as it wishes.
Noting that there are few fears over Hotmail, Yahoo or Gmail giving away
private email data, it is clear that an email service values maintaining
loyal customers over taking risks that could jeopardise people's
confidence in the service.

Were Facebook to be operating with the possibility that people would
walk away over scandalous behaviour — not a realistic option while
people can only contact their Facebook friends through the site itself —
it's very likely they would be more cautious with how they treat their
customers.

So, how exactly would Facebook open up its walled garden and
interoperate with other websites? The key step is to define a standard
protocol just as email has SMTP. Once there is an established mechanism
for a user to have a "profile" page on any website and for that user to
nominate identities that may or may not see more information than the
public can, we already have the crux of a social network.

Not only does this give people the ability to jump ship to another
service if they are unhappy with their current one in any way, but they
can — just as with email — set up their own "ship" by enabling their own
website as their personal profile page. This gives ultimate trust for
those with a desire to have total control of their data. By extension, a
company can run its own internal social network as part of an
employee/phone directory that interoperates with other networks (and the
profiles act as an electronic business card), but with the ability to
configure limits on how much employees can make public. This is
analogous to companies running their own corporate email system to
protect and control the uses of business inboxes.

Such a mechanism would give customers true consumer freedom and exert
the appropriate pressures Facebook arguably needs in order to be more
respectful of people's information. With that incentive, Facebook could
more readily be a repository of private information without fear that it
could all end up public, be it through carelessness or malice.

Large companies like Facebook can easily handle several prosecution
cases a year and while they maintain a walled garden whereby users
cannot easily leave for another service, it seems these cases will have
little effect on their numbers. Perhaps a stronger and simpler incentive
would be the economic pressures from true consumer freedom.
